Operating pg_auto_failover
==========================

This section is not yet complete. Please contact us with any questions.

Deployment
----------

pg_auto_failover is a general purpose tool for setting up PostgreSQL
replication in order to implement High Availability of the PostgreSQL
service.

Provisioning
------------

It is also possible to register pre-existing PostgreSQL instances with a
pg_auto_failover monitor. The ``pg_autoctl create`` command honors the
``PGDATA`` environment variable, and checks whether PostgreSQL is already
running. If Postgres is detected, the new node is registered in SINGLE mode,
bypassing the monitor's role assignment policy.

Upgrading pg_auto_failover, from versions 1.4 onward
-----------------------------------------------------

When upgrading a pg_auto_failover setup, the procedure is different on the
monitor and on the Postgres nodes:

  - on the monitor, the internal pg_auto_failover database schema might have
    changed and needs to be upgraded to its new definition, porting the
    existing data over. The pg_auto_failover database contains the
    registration of every node in the system and their current state.

	It is not possible to trigger a failover during the monitor update.
	Postgres operations on the Postgres nodes continue normally.

	During the restart of the monitor, the other nodes might have trouble
	connecting to the monitor. The ``pg_autoctl`` command is designed to
	retry connecting to the monitor and handle errors gracefully.

  - on the Postgres nodes, the ``pg_autoctl`` command connects to the
    monitor every once in a while (every second by default), and then calls
    the ``node_active`` protocol, a stored procedure in the monitor databases.

	The ``pg_autoctl`` also verifies at each connection to the monitor that
	it's running the expected version of the extension. When that's not the
	case, the "node-active" sub-process quits, to be restarted with the
	possibly new version of the ``pg_autoctl`` binary found on-disk.

As a result, here is the standard upgrade plan for pg_auto_failover:

  1. Upgrade the pg_auto_failover package on the all the nodes, monitor
     included.

	 When using a debian based OS, this looks like the following command when
	 from 1.4 to 1.5::

	   sudo apt-get remove pg-auto-failover-cli-1.4 postgresql-11-auto-failover-1.4
	   sudo apt-get install -q -y pg-auto-failover-cli-1.5 postgresql-11-auto-failover-1.5

  2. Restart the ``pgautofailover`` service on the monitor.

	 When using the systemd integration, all we need to do is::

	   sudo systemctl restart pgautofailover

	 Then we may use the following commands to make sure that the service is
	 running as expected::

	   sudo systemctl status pgautofailover
	   sudo journalctl -u pgautofailover

	 At this point it is expected that the ``pg_autoctl`` logs show that an
	 upgrade has been performed by using the ``ALTER EXTENSION
	 pgautofailover UPDATE TO ...`` command. The monitor is ready with the
	 new version of pg_auto_failover.

When the Postgres nodes ``pg_autoctl`` process connects to the new monitor
version, the check for version compatibility fails, and the "node-active"
sub-process exits. The main ``pg_autoctl`` process supervisor then restart
the "node-active" sub-process from its on-disk binary executable file, which
has been upgraded to the new version. That's why we first install the new
packages for pg_auto_failover on every node, and only then restart the
monitor.

.. important::

   Before upgrading the monitor, which is a simple restart of the
   ``pg_autoctl`` process, it is important that the OS packages for
   pgautofailover be updated on all the Postgres nodes.

   When that's not the case, ``pg_autoctl`` on the Postgres nodes will still
   detect a version mismatch with the monitor extension, and the
   "node-active" sub-process will exit. And when restarted automatically,
   the same version of the local ``pg_autoctl`` binary executable is found
   on-disk, leading to the same version mismatch with the monitor extension.

   After restarting the "node-active" process 5 times, ``pg_autoctl`` quits
   retrying and stops. This includes stopping the Postgres service too, and
   a service downtime might then occur.

And when the upgrade is done we can use ``pg_autoctl show state`` on the
monitor to see that eveything is as expected.

Upgrading from previous pg_auto_failover versions
-------------------------------------------------

The new upgrade procedure described in the previous section is part of
pg_auto_failover since version 1.4. When upgrading from a previous version
of pg_auto_failover, up to and including version 1.3, then all the
``pg_autoctl`` processes have to be restarted fully.

To prevent triggering a failover during the upgrade, it's best to put your
secondary nodes in maintenance. The procedure then looks like the following:

  1. Enable maintenance on your secondary node(s)::

		pg_autoctl enable maintenance

  2. Upgrade the OS packages for pg_auto_failover on every node, as per
     previous section.

  3. Restart the monitor to upgrade it to the new pg_auto_failover version:

	 When using the systemd integration, all we need to do is::

	   sudo systemctl restart pgautofailover

	 Then we may use the following commands to make sure that the service is
	 running as expected::

	   sudo systemctl status pgautofailover
	   sudo journalctl -u pgautofailover

	 At this point it is expected that the ``pg_autoctl`` logs show that an
	 upgrade has been performed by using the ``ALTER EXTENSION
	 pgautofailover UPDATE TO ...`` command. The monitor is ready with the
	 new version of pg_auto_failover.

  4. Restart ``pg_autoctl`` on all Postgres nodes on the cluster.

	 When using the systemd integration, all we need to do is::

	   sudo systemctl restart pgautofailover

	 As in the previous point in this list, make sure the service is now
	 running as expected.

  5. Disable maintenance on your secondary nodes(s)::

		pg_autoctl disable maintenance

Extension dependencies when upgrading the monitor
-------------------------------------------------

Since version 1.4.0 the ``pgautofailover`` extension requires the Postgres
contrib extension ``btree_gist``. The ``pg_autoctl`` command arranges for
the creation of this dependency, and has been buggy in some releases.

As a result, you might have trouble upgrade the pg_auto_failover monitor to
a recent version. It is possible to fix the error by connecting to the
monitor Postgres database and running the ``create extension`` command
manually::

  # create extension btree_gist;

Cluster Management and Operations
---------------------------------

It is possible to operate pg_auto_failover formations and groups directly
from the monitor. All that is needed is an access to the monitor Postgres
database as a client, such as ``psql``. It's also possible to add those
management SQL function calls in your own ops application if you have one.

For security reasons, the ``autoctl_node`` is not allowed to perform
maintenance operations. This user is limited to what ``pg_autoctl`` needs.
You can either create a specific user and authentication rule to expose for
management, or edit the default HBA rules for the ``autoctl`` user. In the
following examples we're directly connecting as the ``autoctl`` role.

The main operations with pg_auto_failover are node maintenance and manual
failover, also known as a controlled switchover.

Maintenance of a secondary node
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is possible to put a secondary node in any group in a MAINTENANCE state,
so that the Postgres server is not doing *synchronous replication* anymore
and can be taken down for maintenance purposes, such as security kernel
upgrades or the like.

The command line tool ``pg_autoctl`` exposes an API to schedule maintenance
operations on the current node, which must be a secondary node at the moment
when maintenance is requested.

Here's an example of using the maintenance commands on a secondary node,
including the output. Of course, when you try that on your own nodes, dates
and PID information might differ::

  $ pg_autoctl enable maintenance
  17:49:19 14377 INFO  Listening monitor notifications about state changes in formation "default" and group 0
  17:49:19 14377 INFO  Following table displays times when notifications are received
      Time |  ID |      Host |   Port |       Current State |      Assigned State
  ---------+-----+-----------+--------+---------------------+--------------------
  17:49:19 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |             primary |        wait_primary
  17:49:19 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |           secondary |    wait_maintenance
  17:49:19 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |    wait_maintenance |    wait_maintenance
  17:49:20 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |        wait_primary |        wait_primary
  17:49:20 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |    wait_maintenance |         maintenance
  17:49:20 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |         maintenance |         maintenance

The command listens to the state changes in the current node's formation and
group on the monitor and displays those changes as it receives them. The
operation is done when the node has reached the ``maintenance`` state.

It is now possible to disable maintenance to allow ``pg_autoctl`` to manage
this standby node again::

  $ pg_autoctl disable maintenance
  17:49:26 14437 INFO  Listening monitor notifications about state changes in formation "default" and group 0
  17:49:26 14437 INFO  Following table displays times when notifications are received
      Time |  ID |      Host |   Port |       Current State |      Assigned State
  ---------+-----+-----------+--------+---------------------+--------------------
  17:49:27 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |         maintenance |          catchingup
  17:49:27 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |          catchingup |          catchingup
  17:49:28 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |          catchingup |           secondary
  17:49:28 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |        wait_primary |             primary
  17:49:28 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |           secondary |           secondary
  17:49:29 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |             primary |             primary

When a standby node is in maintenance, the monitor sets the primary node
replication to WAIT_PRIMARY: in this role, the PostgreSQL streaming
replication is now asynchronous and the standby PostgreSQL server may be
stopped, rebooted, etc.

Maintenance of a primary node
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A primary node must be available at all times in any formation and group in
pg_auto_failover, that is the invariant provided by the whole solution. With
that in mind, the only way to allow a primary node to go to a maintenance
mode is to first failover and promote the secondary node.

The same command ``pg_autoctl enable maintenance`` implements that operation
when run on a primary node with the option ``--allow-failover``. Here is an
example of such an operation::

  $ pg_autoctl enable maintenance
  11:53:03 50526 WARN  Enabling maintenance on a primary causes a failover
  11:53:03 50526 FATAL Please use --allow-failover to allow the command proceed

As we can see the option ``allow-failover`` is mandatory. In the next
example we use it::

  $ pg_autoctl enable maintenance --allow-failover
  13:13:42 1614 INFO  Listening monitor notifications about state changes in formation "default" and group 0
  13:13:42 1614 INFO  Following table displays times when notifications are received
      Time |  ID |      Host |   Port |       Current State |      Assigned State
  ---------+-----+-----------+--------+---------------------+--------------------
  13:13:43 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |             primary | prepare_maintenance
  13:13:43 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |           secondary |   prepare_promotion
  13:13:43 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |   prepare_promotion |   prepare_promotion
  13:13:43 |   2 | localhost |   5002 | prepare_maintenance | prepare_maintenance
  13:13:44 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |   prepare_promotion |    stop_replication
  13:13:45 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |    stop_replication |    stop_replication
  13:13:46 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |    stop_replication |        wait_primary
  13:13:46 |   2 | localhost |   5002 | prepare_maintenance |         maintenance
  13:13:46 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |        wait_primary |        wait_primary
  13:13:47 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |         maintenance |         maintenance

When the operation is done we can have the old primary re-join the group,
this time as a secondary::

  $ pg_autoctl disable maintenance
  13:14:46 1985 INFO  Listening monitor notifications about state changes in formation "default" and group 0
  13:14:46 1985 INFO  Following table displays times when notifications are received
      Time |  ID |      Host |   Port |       Current State |      Assigned State
  ---------+-----+-----------+--------+---------------------+--------------------
  13:14:47 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |         maintenance |          catchingup
  13:14:47 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |          catchingup |          catchingup
  13:14:52 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |          catchingup |           secondary
  13:14:52 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |        wait_primary |             primary
  13:14:52 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |           secondary |           secondary
  13:14:53 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |             primary |             primary


Triggering a failover
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is possible to trigger a manual failover, or a switchover, using the
command ``pg_autoctl perform failover``. Here's an example of what happens
when running the command::

  $ pg_autoctl perform failover
  11:58:00 53224 INFO  Listening monitor notifications about state changes in formation "default" and group 0
  11:58:00 53224 INFO  Following table displays times when notifications are received
      Time |  ID |      Host |   Port |      Current State |     Assigned State
  ---------+-----+-----------+--------+--------------------+-------------------
  11:58:01 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |            primary |           draining
  11:58:01 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |          secondary |  prepare_promotion
  11:58:01 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |           draining |           draining
  11:58:01 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |  prepare_promotion |  prepare_promotion
  11:58:02 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |  prepare_promotion |   stop_replication
  11:58:02 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |           draining |     demote_timeout
  11:58:03 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |     demote_timeout |     demote_timeout
  11:58:04 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |   stop_replication |   stop_replication
  11:58:05 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |   stop_replication |       wait_primary
  11:58:05 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |     demote_timeout |            demoted
  11:58:05 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |       wait_primary |       wait_primary
  11:58:05 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |            demoted |            demoted
  11:58:06 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |            demoted |         catchingup
  11:58:06 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |         catchingup |         catchingup
  11:58:08 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |         catchingup |          secondary
  11:58:08 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |       wait_primary |            primary
  11:58:08 |   1 | localhost |   5001 |          secondary |          secondary
  11:58:08 |   2 | localhost |   5002 |            primary |            primary

Again, timings and PID numbers are not expected to be the same when you run
the command on your own setup.

Also note in the output that the command shows the whole set of transitions
including when the old primary is now a secondary node. The database is
available for read-write traffic as soon as we reach the state
``wait_primary``.

Implementing a controlled switchover
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is generally useful to distinguish a *controlled switchover* to a
*failover*. In a controlled switchover situation it is possible to organise
the sequence of events in a way to avoid data loss and lower downtime to a
minimum.

In the case of pg_auto_failover, because we use **synchronous replication**,
we don't face data loss risks when triggering a manual failover. Moreover,
our monitor knows the current primary health at the time when the failover
is triggered, and drives the failover accordingly.

So to trigger a controlled switchover with pg_auto_failover you can use the
same API as for a manual failover::

  $ pg_autoctl perform switchover

Because the subtelties of orchestrating either a controlled switchover or an
unplanned failover are all handled by the monitor, rather than the client
side command line, at the client level the two command ``pg_autoctl perform
failover`` and ``pg_autoctl perform switchover`` are synonyms, or aliases.

Current state, last events
--------------------------

The following commands display information from the pg_auto_failover monitor tables
``pgautofailover.node`` and ``pgautofailover.event``:

::

  $ pg_autoctl show state
  $ pg_autoctl show events

When run on the monitor, the commands outputs all the known states and
events for the whole set of formations handled by the monitor. When run on a
PostgreSQL node, the command connects to the monitor and outputs the
information relevant to the service group of the local node only.

For interactive debugging it is helpful to run the following command from
the monitor node while e.g. initializing a formation from scratch, or
performing a manual failover::

  $ watch pg_autoctl show state

Monitoring pg_auto_failover in Production
-----------------------------------------

The monitor reports every state change decision to a LISTEN/NOTIFY channel
named ``state``. PostgreSQL logs on the monitor are also stored in a table,
``pgautofailover.event``, and broadcast by NOTIFY in the channel ``log``.

.. _replacing_monitor_online:

Replacing the monitor online
----------------------------

When the monitor node is not available anymore, it is possible to create a
new monitor node and then switch existing nodes to a new monitor by using
the following commands.

  1. Apply the STONITH approach on the old monitor to make sure this node is
     not going to show up again during the procedure. This step is sometimes
     referred to as “fencing”.

  2. On every node, ending with the (current) Postgres primary node for each
     group, disable the monitor while ``pg_autoctl`` is still running::

	   $ pg_autoctl disable monitor --force


  3. Create a new monitor node::

	   $ pg_autoctl create monitor ...

  4. On the current primary node first, so that it's registered first and as
     a primary still, for each group in your formation(s), enable the
     monitor online again::

	   $ pg_autoctl enable monitor postgresql://autoctl_node@.../pg_auto_failover

  5. On every other (secondary) node, enable the monitor online again::

	   $ pg_autoctl enable monitor postgresql://autoctl_node@.../pg_auto_failover

See :ref:`pg_autoctl_disable_monitor` and :ref:`pg_autoctl_enable_monitor`
for details about those commands.

This operation relies on the fact that a ``pg_autoctl`` can be operated
without a monitor, and when reconnecting to a new monitor, this process
reset the parts of the node state that comes from the monitor, such as the
node identifier.

Trouble-Shooting Guide
----------------------

pg_auto_failover commands can be run repeatedly. If initialization fails the first
time -- for instance because a firewall rule hasn't yet activated -- it's
possible to try ``pg_autoctl create`` again. pg_auto_failover will review its previous
progress and repeat idempotent operations (``create database``, ``create
extension`` etc), gracefully handling errors.
